---
layout: sidenav
title: Research Statement
navlinks:
  - text: Research Statement
    link: research/statement/
    current: true
  - text: How are we funded?
    link: research/grants/
  - text: Ongoing Projects
    link: http://wiki.bcs.rochester.edu/HlpLab/Projects
    external: true
  - text: Independent Study Projects
    link: research/independent_study.html
  - text: Publications
    link: publications/
  - text: Video Publications
    link: publications/video.html
---

## What type of research do we do?

**An introduction to research in the Human Language Processing Lab**

*T. Florian Jaeger, Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of
Rochester*

The stunning ability to communicate abstract messages is a
quintessential human trait that uniquely defines us in the animal
kingdom. At the same time, human language is a complex behavior that
presumably draws in large parts on evolutionarily younger
neural/cognitive systems. Research in the Human Language Processing
(HLP) Lab seeks to understand the computational cognitive systems that
allow the human brain to communicate information at a rate and
complexity that far exceeds that of other animals.

To illustrate the complexity of speech perception, for example, imagine
reading a hand-written text without spaces between words through a
somewhat blurry lense showing only 1-2 letters a time moving under
variably rapid speeds of 3-7 syllables/second that are not under your
control ... What then allows us to typically understand each other
(though certainly not without the occasional problem)? Understanding the
perceptual and motor inference processes that underlie our ability to
robustly communicate, is the primary goal of research in HLP Lab. To this
end, we study language comprehension and production, and the adaptive
learning processes that facilitate message transfer despite noise in the
environment and in our biological systems. We employ mathematical and
computational models and evaluate them against behavioral data (and,
more recently, also brain imaging data). This includes research at the
phonetic, phonological, morphological, syntactic, and discourse level in
written and spoken comprehension as well as spoken production. Together
with research from other labs, our work suggests that the language
production and comprehension systems are organized to exploit
statistical structure that is present the world (e.g., the speech
signal) to de- and encode language robustly. For example, both speakers
and listeners take advantage of redundancy in the signal as well as
expectations about likely messages based on previous experience.

**The role of prediction and uncertainty in language understanding.** To
understand language, comprehenders must map an acoustic (or visual)
signal onto sequences of phonemes, words, and phrases, with the ultimate
goal of inferring the intended message. This signal is perturbed by
noise –for example, noise in the environment, but also perceptual noise.
How then do we understand each other? It is now broadly accepted that
top-down expectations play a crucial role in achieving robust and
perhaps even efficient language understanding. These expectations are
based on beliefs about the distributions of phonetic features, sound
classes, words, and syntactic structures.

Research in HLP Lab seeks to understand how these beliefs and
uncertainty about them affect language understanding via prediction
(e.g., Bicknell et al., 2014; Fine et al., 2010, 2013; Linzen and
Jaeger, 2014). For example, we recently have investigated the _role of
word-by-word entropy in parsing_ written input (Linzen and Jaeger, 2014,
in prep). In other recent research, we have investigated how much
uncertainty listeners can maintain about the speech signal as it unfolds
over time (Bicknell et al., 2014, in prep). This research suggests that
the human brain compresses the high-dimensional speech signal in a way
that even many syllables downstream, subphonetic details are readily
recoverable. Furthermore, this work suggests that the _combination of
information from the bottom-up acoustic signal and top-down constraints
follows the principles of an ideal observer_ (Bicknell et al., in prep).

**The lack of invariance problem and how we can understand each other at
all.** This ability to integrate information from different sources into
predictions about upcoming sounds, words, etc. is even more astonishing
once we take into consideration one of the oldest puzzle of the speech
sciences, the lack of invariance: not only is the speech signal
perturbed by noise, different talkers also differ in how they realize
the same sound. This means that one speaker’s “s” can be physically more
similar to another speaker’s “sh”, than that speaker’s “s”. Technically,
this means that the statistics of linguistic sound categories are
non-stationary (they change, for example, based on the talker).

An increasing focus in our research is dedicated to how the human mind
overcomes this problem. We have proposed that the key in understanding
robust speech perception is to view it as a problem of inference under
uncertainty at multiple levels (Kleinschmidt and Jaeger, 2012, 2015; see
also Qian et al., 2012, under revision for an extension beyond language
processing). _Listeners need to be able to recognize the statistics of
previously encountered (familiar) talkers, adapt to the statistics of
novel talkers, and generalize based on previous experience with similar
talkers_. This draws a picture of language competence that differs
starkly from the idea that speaking and understanding a language
involves ‘one grammar’. Rather, we continuously adapt both previous
beliefs about the structure of the linguistic input we have received and
beliefs about the statistical structure of the current talker
(Kleinschmidt and Jaeger, 2015). We have demonstrated that this view can
account for a variety of otherwise puzzling properties of speech
perception, including adaptation behaviors previously considered to be
due to separate mechanisms (Kleinschmidt and Jaeger, 2011, 2012),
explaining-away effects in perception, our ability to generalize to
novel speakers of the same language background, etc.

_We have also extended this view to second language acquisition and
limitations in our ability to learn new languages_ (Pajak et al, in
press; Toscano et al., under revision). Further tests of this account
are currently under way, employing artificial language learning (Chu et
al., in prep) as well as the statistical modeling of big data from over
50,000 second language learners of Dutch (Schepens et al., in prep).

This ability to adjust to talker-specific preferences is not limited to
pronunciation (e.g., Fine et al., 2013; Jaeger and Snider, 2013;
Yildirim et al., 2013, under review). In self-paced reading (Fine et
al., 2010, 2013; Fine and Jaeger, 2013a, under review; Fraundorf and
Jaeger, 2014; Linzen and Jaeger, in prep), eye-tracking reading studies
(Farmer et al., 2014), and spoken visual world studies (Fraundorf et
al., in prep), we have found that _comprehenders can rapidly adjust
their expectations about the relative frequency of different syntactic
structures in the current context_. We have found that the magnitude of
expectation violation at any point in time is a predictor of the change
in expectations at subsequent processing (prediction error-based
learning, Fine and Jaeger, 2013b; Jaeger and Snider, 2013). Furthermore,
the same type of computational model that provides excellent qualitative
and quantitative fits against data from phonetic adaptation also
provides a good fit against our experiments on expectation adaptation
during sentence processing (Fine et al., 2010; Kleinschmidt et al.,
2012). More broadly, we are also interested in understanding how
prediction and uncertainty affect language processing (Bicknell et al.,
to appear; Kuperberg and Jaeger, under review; Linzen & Jaeger, 2015).

**To what extent and how do speakers contribute to successful
communication?** Another focus of research in HLP Lab lies on the
speaker. Languages often provide several near-meaning equivalent ways of
encoding the same message. We have investigated to what extent speakers’
preferences between different forms for the same meaning are affected by
a bias to trade off production ease or effort against the goal to be
understood (e.g., Jaeger, 2006, 2010; Levy and Jaeger, 2007; Jaeger and
Ferreira, 2013). For example, we have investigated _speakers’ preference
to produce more or less reduced words or structures based on the
contextual inferability of the meaning they encode_ (e.g., Frank and
Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger, 2011; Kurumada and Jaeger, 2013, 2015; Norcliffe
and Jaeger, 2015; Wasow et al., 2011). At any level of linguistic
representations –ranging from phonetics, via morphology, syntactic
production, to supra-clausal structure—we have found that more
predictable elements tend to be reduced (see Jaeger, 2013 for an
overview). Together with a growing body of research from other lab –both
from corpora and experiments—this provides evidence that language
production is organized in a way that on average dedicates less effort
to the production of linguistic form that can be inferred from the
context.

_We have observed similar preferences in language learning_.
Specifically, we have employed artificial language learning to
investigate whether learners have abstract biases for languages that
balance effort and robust message transfer (Fedzechkina et al., 2011,
2012, 2013, under revision). For example, we have exposed monolingual
speakers of English (a language without case) to a miniature
(artificial) language with optional case-marking (a phenomenon that
exists in Japanese and Korean, for example). Learners restructure the
language to resemble the case-marking patterns observed in actual
languages –specifically, the increased the rate of case-marking in
sentences that would otherwise have been ambiguous but omitted
case-marking where it wasn’t necessary.

More recently we have begun to study exactly how speaker come to trade
off production effort/ease against robust message transfer.
Specifically, we have proposed that speakers integrate feedback both
from the perception of their own speech and from interlocutors with the
goal to increase the communicative success of subsequent utterances (in
ways similar to implicit learning in motor control, cf. Jaeger, 2013;
Jaeger and Ferreira, 2013). To study these questions, _we study how
speakers change their pronunciation_ (Buz et al., 2014, under review;
Seyfarth et al., 2015) _and syntactic production preferences (Roche et
al., in prep)_. In related lines of work, we have investigated how
speakers adapt to what they perceive to be their interlocutors’
expectations (Jaeger and Snider, 2013) or in response to _social
relations or status of interlocutors_ (Weatherholtz et al., 2014).

**Methodological advancement.** This includes introductions and reviews
of advanced statistical methods (e.g., _Generalized Linear Mixed
Models_, Jaeger, 2008) and their application to typology, which
typically provides hierarchically organized data (Jaeger et al., 2011,
2012) or corpus-based research, which typically involves heterogeneous
and high-dimensional data (Frank and Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger, 2006, 2010,
2011). Researchers in HLP Lab have also been strongly involved in the
development, testing, and application of new _crowdsourcing paradigms
for language research_ (e.g., web-based paradigms for acceptability
judgments, Jaeger, 2004; self-paced reading, Fine et al., 2010;
artificial language learning, Tily et al., 2011; iterative language
learning, Gutman, 2012; speech perception and adaptation, Kleinschmidt
and Jaeger, 2012; spoken sentence recall, Jaeger and Grimshaw, 2013; the
role of feedback in articulation, Buz et al., 2014; socially-mediated
alignment in spoken scene descriptions, Weatherholtz et al., 2014).
These paradigms allow the collection of data from speakers and listeners
of different socio-economic and language backgrounds. Going beyond the
study of college populations also motivates our _study of language
production via speech corpora_ (Degen and Jaeger, in prep; Gallo et al.,
2008, 2009; Jaeger, 2010, 2011; Jaeger and Wasow, 2006; Jaeger and
Snider, 2013; see also Jaeger et al., 2012a,b on phonological production
in unscripted speech) and a dedication to _cross-linguistic validation
and extension of psycholinguistic theories_ (e.g., Jaeger and Norcliffe,
2009; Qian, 2009; Qian and Jaeger, 2012), including research on Yucatec
Maya (Butler et al., 2011, 2013, 2014, in prep; Norcliffe and Jaeger,
2015), Mexican Spanish (e.g., Gallo et al., 2009; Butler et al., in
prep), and Japanese (Kurumada and Jaeger, 2013, 2015).


<a data-dropdown="drop_refs" aria-controls="drop_refs" aria-expanded="false"><b>Selected References &raquo;</b></a>
<div id="drop_refs" data-dropdown-content class="f-dropdown content" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1">
{% link_doi %}

  * Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. L. (2012). Language
  learners restructure their input to facilitate efficient communication.

  *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
  America*, 1–6. doi:10.1073/pnas.1215776109

  * Fine, A. B., & Jaeger, T. F. (2013). Evidence for Implicit Learning in
  Syntactic Comprehension. *Cognitive Science*, *37*, 578–591.
  doi:10.1111/cogs.12022

  * Fine, A. B., Jaeger, T. F., Farmer, T. a., & Qian, T. (2013). Rapid
  expectation adaptation during syntactic comprehension. *PloS ONE*,
  *8*(10), e77661. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0077661

  * Fine, A. B., Qian, T., Jaeger, T. F., & Jacobs, R. A. (2010). Is there
  syntactic adaptation in language comprehension? In J. T. Hale (Ed.),
  *Proceedings of ACL: Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational
  Linguistics* (pp. 18–26). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
  Linguistics.

  * Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical Data Analysis: Away from ANOVAs
  (transformation or not) and towards Logit Mixed Models. *Journal of
  Memory and Language*, *59*(4), 434–446. doi:10.1016/j.jml.2007.11.007

  * Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: speakers manage
  syntactic information density. *Cognitive Psychology*, *61*(1), 23–62.
  doi:10.1016/j.cogpsych.2010.02.002

  * Jaeger, T. F. (2013). Production preferences cannot be understood
  without reference to communication. *Frontiers in Psychology*,
  *4*(April), 1–4. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00230

  * Jaeger, T. F., & Ferreira, V. (2013). Seeking predictions from a
  predictive framework. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, *36*(4), 31–32.
  doi:10.1017/S0140525X12002592

  * Jaeger, T. F., Furth, K., & Hilliard, C. (2012). Phonological Overlap
  Affects Lexical Selection During Sentence Production. *Journal of
  Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition*, *38*(5),
  1439–1449. doi:10.1037/a0027862

  * Jaeger, T. F., Graff, P., Croft, W., & Pontillo, D. (2011). Mixed effect
  models for genetic and areal dependencies in linguistic typology.
  *Linguistic Typology*, *15*(2), 281–319. doi:10.1515/LITY.2011.021

  * Jaeger, T. F., Pontillo, D., & Graff, P. (2012). Comment on “Phonemic
  diversity supports a serial founder effect model of language expansion
  from Africa”. *Science*, *335*(6072), 1042. doi:10.1126/science.1215107

  * Jaeger, T. F., & Snider, N. E. (2013). Alignment as a consequence of
  expectation adaptation: Syntactic priming is affected by the prime’s
  prediction error given both prior and recent experience. *Cognition*,
  *127*(1), 57–83. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2012.10.013

  * Kleinschmidt, D., & Jaeger, T. F. (2011). A Bayesian belief updating
  model of phonetic recalibration and selective adaptation. *Proceedings
  of the Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics Workshop at
  ACL*, 10–19.

  * Kleinschmidt, D. F., & Jaeger, T. (n.d.). Robust Speech Perception:
  Recognizing the familiar, Generalizing to the similar, and adapting to
  the novel. Resubmitted to *Psychological Review.*

  * Levy, R., & Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers optimize information density
  through syntactic reduction. In B. Schlökopf, J. Platt, & T. Hoffman
  (Eds.), *Advances in neural information processing systems (NIPS) 19*
  (pp. 849–856). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

  * Qian, T., & Jaeger, T. F. (2012). Cue effectiveness in communicatively
  efficient discourse production. *Cognitive Science, 36(7)*, 1312–36.
  doi:10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01256.x

  * Tily, H. J., Frank, M. C., & Jaeger, T. F. (2011). The learnability of
  constructed languages reflects typological patterns. In *Proceedings of
  the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci11)*
  (pp. 1364–1369). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

  * Yildirim, I., Degen, J., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Jaeger, T. F. (submitted).
  Linguistic Variability and Adaptation in Quantifier Meanings. Submitted
  for review to *Journal of Memory and Language.*

{% endlink_doi %}
</div>

## Learn more

You can listen to and watch the following talk summarizing some of our work on efficiency in language production (given in April 2010 at Rutgers. Thanks to Chris Kourtev and Andrew Watts for preparing the video).

<div class="flex-video">
  <iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/1fFkO7xV0SY" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

A list of [ongoing projects](http://wiki.bcs.rochester.edu/HlpLab/Projects) can be found in our lab wiki, and our publication page contains [presentations and papers about previous projects]({{site.baseurl}}/publications/). In case you're interested in our work, but do not have a background in psycholinguistics, here are some handbook references that may get you started:

  * For an introduction to language production:
    * Bock, K. and Levelt, W. (1994). Language production. In Gernsbacher, M. A., editor, Handbook of Psycholinguistics, chapter 29, pages 945–984. Academic Press, ﬁrst edition.
    * Ferreira, V. and Slevc, L. (2007). Grammatical encoding. The Oxford Handbook of Psycholinguistics, chapter 27, pages 453–469. Oxford University Press.
    * Griffin, Z. M. and Ferreira, V. S. (2006). Properties of spoken language production. In Traxler, M. and Gernsbacher, M. A., editors, Handbook of Psycholinguistics, chapter 2, pages 21–59. Academic Press, second edition.
  * For an introduction to sentence comprehension:
    * Pickering, M. J. and van Gompel, R. P. G. (2006). Syntactic parsing. In Traxler, M. and Gernsbacher, M. A., editors, Handbook of Psycholinguistics, chapter 12, pages 455–504. Academic Press, second edition.
  * A brief overview of research on processing complexity in comprehension and production
    * Jaeger, T.F. and Tily, H. (2010). [On Language ‘Utility’: Processing Complexity and Communicative Efficiency](http://www.bcs.rochester.edu/people/fjaeger/papers/JaegerTily10.pdf). WIRE: Cognitive Science.
  * For a very quick introduction to probability theory and information theory as relevant to language research:
    * Jurafsky, D. and Martin, J. H. (2008). Speech and Language Processing. Prentice Hall, second edition.
    * Manning, C. D. and Schuetze, H. (1999). Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing, chapter 3. Mathematical Foundations, pages 39–80. MIT Press, ﬁrst edition.
