---
layout: sidenav
title: Two post-doctoral positions available for 2016
category: jobs
custom_local_js: sticky
navlinks:
  - text: Independent Study
    link: jobs/independent.html
  - text: Research Assistants
    link: jobs/ra.html
  - text: Volunteer
    link: jobs/volunteer.html
  - text: Graduate Students &amp; Post-Docs
    link: grads/
  - text: Grad &amp; Post-doc funding
    link: grads/funding.html
  - text: Visiting Faculty funding
    link: jobs/faculty_funding.html
  - text: Past job opportunities
    link: jobs/past.html
---

The Human Language Processing Lab
(*https://www.hlp.rochester.edu/people/*) headed by Florian Jaeger at
the University of Rochester is searching for an **outstanding
post-doctoral researcher** to join our project on **inference and
learning during speech perception and adaptation. Applicants from any
fields in the cognitive and language sciences are welcome.**

**About the position:** We are particularly interested in researchers
with a *strong computational background* (ideally, including Bayesian
inference, sampling, etc. though that is not necessary). Although this
position is part of a specific project, candidates are
welcome/encouraged to develop their own independent research program.
Expertise in phonetics or speech perception are preferred, but expertise
in the relevant inference processes in another perceptual domain
(combined with the willingness to acquire expertise in speech) might
make for a great fit, too.

The core of our research project is behavioral and computational, but
expertise in fMRI and, specifically, MVPA and related methods are an
additional plus, as there is the potential to collaborate across labs on
the neural foundations of speech adaptation (w/ Raj Raizada). The most
important thing though is the drive to dig beyond the surface with an
interest in understanding the nature of the implicit adaptive processes
(and the structure of the representations that support them) that allow
robust language understanding (... whether in speech perception or
higher levels of language processing).

*The position will provide competitive NIH-level post-doctoral salaries
and travel funding (plus moving expenses)*. Start dates could be as
early as *now* or as late as 9/2016. If there is a great fit between the
candidate and the project, we can wait. The lab has a good record at job
placement, with three of the four most recent post-docs now holding
tenure-track positions in linguistics or psychology.

**Interested candidates should contact** HLP lab manager Olga Nikolayeva
(<onikolay@u.rochester.edu>) along with a CV and a brief statement of
*primary* research interests (no full research statement necessary, but
if there is one we'd be happy to read it). Recommendations are will be
elicited after initial review of applications, but applicants are
welcome to include them in the initial application. **Applications are
reviewed on a rolling basis starting 3/1.** (if you're wondering whether
it makes sense to apply, please contact Florian Jaeger at
<fjaeger@mail.bcs.rochester.edu>).

**About the project:** The project includes research on *lack of
invariance, learning in non-stationary environments, inference under
uncertainty, causal attribution, and the relation between linguistics
and social perception*. Our main goals are

1\) to investigate the organization of the implicit probabilistic beliefs
that underlie speech perception, such as implicit knowledge about the
covariance of socio-indexical features (such as gender, age, dialects,
etc.) and phonetic properties

2\) to understand how these beliefs are acquired, adapted, and employed
in inferences during online language understanding, including drawing on
previous experience with talkers and the ability to generalize to
similar talkers.

For an overview, of our research program and goals, see [Kleinschmidt and
Jaeger (2015-PsychRev)](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259571827_Robust_Speech_Perception_Recognize_the_Familiar_Generalize_to_the_Similar_and_Adapt_to_the_Novel)

**About the team / HLP Lab:** HLP lab is part of the Brain and Cognitive
Sciences and the Center of Language Sciences. The team currently
consists of one post-doctoral fellow and four graduate students (plus
other lab members working on other questions). Related projects include
work on accent and dialect adaptation (incl. a large project involving
researchers in Australia, New Zealand, and the UK), pedagogical use of
adaptation in the class room, and L2/Ln learning/teaching (in
collaboration with researchers in Hong Kong; see also Pajak et al.,
2016-LangLearn). We also investigate similar processes in speech
production and in language processing at higher levels of
representations (see Fine et al., 2013-PLoS One; Fine and Jaeger,
2016-JEP:LMC; Jaeger & Snider, 2013-Cognition; Yildirim et al.,
2015-JML) and language production (e.g., Buz et al., 2015-JML; Seyfarth
et al., 2016-JASA; Weatherholtz et al., 2014-LVC). Most recent papers
are available via [ResearchGate](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/T_Florian_Jaeger/contribution).
