---
lastname: Buxó-Lugo
firstname: Andrés
username: abuxo
homepage: https://sites.google.com/site/andresbuxolugo/
affiliation:
  role: PhD student
  department: Department of Cognitive Psychology
  institution: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
haspic: true
date: 2017-02-28
talk:
  link: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0749596X16000231
  title: Expectations and adaptation in prosodic processing
---
Prosody - the rhythm, intensity, and intonation of speech - is a crucial aspect 
of human communication. However, there are still many questions as to how 
listeners process and represent prosodic information. Prosodic processing has 
usually been thought of as a mainly bottom-up process, where listeners hear cues
and build up their prosodic representations based on this acoustic information.
However, because prosody signals information about many other levels of language 
processing (e.g., syntax, pragmatics, meta-linguistic), it is likely that these 
other levels of language processing might affect how listeners interpret prosodic 
information. We decided to study this possibility by investigating the relationship 
between prosodic and syntactic processing. In a series of studies, we explored how 
listeners’ representation of prosodic boundaries were affected by their expectations
as to where these boundaries should occur given the syntactic structure of the sentence 
they heard. We find that listeners are most likely to report boundaries at locations 
where they were more syntactically plausible, despite the acoustic information they 
received in the message. Additionally, we explore whether listeners can adapt to 
new prosody-syntax mappings after being given feedback based on their interpretations 
of ambiguous sentences. Our results suggest that listeners are able to adapt to 
novel (even contradictory) prosody-syntax mappings after enough exposure. Together, 
these series of studies shed light on how listeners process prosodic information,
suggesting that prosodic representations are somewhat flexible, and are influenced by
listeners’ expectations and experience with language.

